creating a database design for an
e-commerce website is a great exercise
to help you practice your skills in this
video I'll show you a database design
for an e-commerce website the
requirements it meets and explain each
of the tables and why they are designed
in this way
there's a link to the diagram in the
description so you can download it for
reference
let's get into it
welcome to the database star YouTube
channel the place for developers looking
to improve their database and SQL skills
we're looking at a design of an
e-commerce database because it can help
you design your own database whether
it's a similar e-commerce system or
another system
the aim is to help you understand how
some of the concepts can be designed
before we get into the design of the
database let's look at what we want to
do first
what should the database be able to do
here is a list of the things that I
think an e-commerce database and website
should be able to do
I've based this on a bit of research and
a bit of experience with online shopping
I'll list these in the description as
well and we'll mention them as we go
through the design
in summary it includes functionality for
creating accounts contact details
multiple addresses and payment methods
products and product categories product
attributes number of products in stock
shopping carts shipping methods order
processing user reviews and product
promotions
let's have a look at the design
here is the ERD or entity relationship
diagram of the e-commerce database as I
mentioned earlier there's a link to an
image of this in the description if you
want your own copy
there are a lot of tables and
relationships here
this might seem a bit overwhelming and
confusing but we'll go through each of
the different areas and I'll explain
what they are
let's start with the site user table
this represents a user who can log into
the website which meets requirement
number one users can create accounts and
log into the website
will store an ID as the primary key
which is used to relate to several other
tables
we'll store an email address which is
used for contacting the customer
this assumes that the user can also use
their email address to log in so we
haven't added a username field
but if you want to you can add a
username field as well
we also add a phone number field to use
for any Communications if needed
this table will allow us to meet
requirement number two
finally we have a password field here of
course this will be encrypted and not
stored in plain text
we have the address table
we also have an ID field as the primary
key which as you may see is a convention
I've taken for most of the tables in
this database
we have a range for other fields for an
address unit number Street number
address line one and two
City region and postal code
we have a separate table for country as
there is a defined list of a couple
hundred countries and this is related to
the address using the primary key and
foreign key
for more details on why this approach is
taken check out my other video here on
designing address fields
requirement number three states that a
user can have multiple addresses on
their account and specify a default so
we have a joining table called user
address
this assumes that an address can be
applied to more than one user
there could be functionality in the
website to allow an existing address to
be related if for example two people in
the same house place an order to the
same address
this could prevent duplicate addresses
in the table
so the user address table has a link to
the user table and the address table
we also have an is default column which
will allow the user to specify which of
their addresses are the default
this would be some kind of Boolean value
and set for a single address
next we'll take a look at the payment
methods requirement number four says
users can add one or more payment
methods to their account and can set a
default payment method
we can achieve this by using this table
here called user payment method
it has an ID as the primary key and a
link to the user that sets up the
payment method it has a foreign key of
payment type ID which is linked to the
payment type table
this table would include values such as
credit card PayPal or other payment
types we want to support
the provider field may be something like
Mastercard or VISA or another company
who provides the payment
account number is the number used for
payment and an expiry date is added for
the payment
finally we have an is default field to
let the user specify that one of their
payment methods is the default
there are a range of regulations that
need to be followed if you want to store
credit card information in the database
there may be other solutions for this
such as allowing another provider to
process the credit card transactions so
we don't need to store the credit card
information
so this design could be updated if
that's the approach we want to take
let's move over to products
requirement 5 and 6 are about storing
products and that categories can belong
to other categories
we have a product category table here
which contains an ID and a category name
such as clothing or shoes
categories can belong to other
categories and the way we've done this
is having what's called a self-join this
means that a category has a foreign key
to another category's ID record
this allows us to have a hierarchy of
categories and we don't need to create
Separate Tables for category and
subcategory
we can also have as many categories as
we need we aren't limited to just one or
two
we've done this using the parent
category ID field which links to the ID
field in the product category table
let's look at the product table this is
one of the many tables that we've used
to define the product and these are
arguably the most complex of the whole
design
let's go through them one by one
this product table defines what is shown
on a list of products page
when you browse an online store you'll
see a range of products probably with an
image
a product such as Slim t-shirt would
only be shown once even though it may
come in a range of colors and sizes
in this table we have an ID and a link
to the product category
we have a name and a description of the
product we also have a product image
field which would be where we store a
link to an image to be shown on the list
page
here's an example of what could be shown
in the product table we've got a couple
of products with names descriptions and
links to images
the table to the left is product item
but we'll come back to that as we need
to look at a few other tables first
the next table we'll look at is called
variation
this table allows us to specify what
options can be changed on a product
for example a product of slim T-shirt
has different options for size and color
in this variation table we have an entry
for size and an entry for color
this table includes an ID and a link to
the category table and the name of the
variation such as size or color
we've linked it to the category table as
we have assumed that the variation
applies to the category
for example the category of clothing
could have size color and material
the category of mobile phone could have
variations of color storage capacity and
screen size
it would also allow us to Define further
details of sizes as there may be
separate sizes for men's t-shirts
women's pants or shoes here's an example
of some data that would go into this
table
we have some variations for one category
which could be clothing and another
category which could be mobile phones
the next table is the one to the left
which we've called variation option
this will list all of the different
possible values for each variation
for example a size variation for
clothing could contain values such as
excess s m l and XL
a color variation option for phones
could be black white gray and blue
there's a link to the variation table
for each option and an ID column and the
value to use
here's an example of what could go into
this table we have some records for
different variations and different
values
this design of options for products is
similar to an entity attribute value
design which is where we have the
attribute types listed in the variations
and the values in this option table
this has the advantage of being quite
flexible but we lose the data quality
checks you might get with dedicated
tables and data types for example
instead of storing shoe sizes in this
table as values which would be a text
column we may have had a shoe size table
which is stored as numbers
I went with the approach of Separate
Tables for each attribute in another
video I created on product attributes
which you can see here this is a
different approach which may work better
for a larger number of products
the next table is the one above called
Product item
this is the instance of the product with
all the different options
for example if the product record is
Slim t-shirt then this product item
would be slim t-shirt in a color of
black and a size of M
for this combination of attributes we
have an SKU or stock keeping unit which
is a standard identifier in the
e-commerce world
we also store the quantity that we have
in stock which will let us meet
requirement number eight which is about
keeping track of the number of products
in stock we have a product image field
which could be used if we want to show a
different image on the product page for
each attribute
for example different colors of phones
or t-shirts
finally we have the price field which is
the price for the product
the price may vary depending on the
options
for t-shirts they may all be the same
price but for phones the price may vary
depending on the options
so this product item record is the
combination of all of the variation
options
how do we specify which options apply
how do we know that the product item
with an ID of 5 is in the color black
and a size of M
we do this by joining to the variation
option table however a product item can
have many variation options such as a
t-shirt having a color of black and a
size of M
A variation option can also have many
product items there can be more than one
T-shirt with the size of M
so we have a many-to-many relationship
and need a joining table in the middle
I've got another video here which goes
into more detail on many-to-many
relationships so check that out if you
want to know more this joining table is
called Product configuration
stores the combinations of the product
item and variation option
it allows us to specify that each
product item can have many different
variation options
it will be used on the page that allows
users to select the attributes such as
size or color and show the prices
now that we've covered the product part
let's move on to the shopping cart
feature
requirement number nine mentions that
visitors can add one or more products to
their shopping cart as part of their
shopping experience
shopping carts are not saved in the
database unless they are logged in
this means that the shopping carts are
related to users and won't be guests or
Anonymous users
so we have a shopping cart table here
which has an ID and a related user ID
the items in the shopping cart are
stored in the shopping cart item table
this has an ID a link to the shopping
cart table as a cart ID and a link to
the product item that was added and the
quantity that is in the shopping cart
it's saved in the database to the user
requirement number 10 is about
specifying payment details and address
as part of placing an order so let's
move on to that
we have a table here called shop order
which captures the order placed by the
user
we've called it shop order rather than
order because order is an SQL keyword
and it could get confusing in our SQL
scripts this table has an ID a link to
the user ID that created the order and
an order date which captures the date
and probably the time it was placed
we capture the payment method ID which
was used which is a link to the existing
payment method table we covered earlier
we have a column called shipping address
which is a link to the address table we
looked at earlier too
the next field is shipping method which
allows the user to specify things like
standard priority Express or whatever
options are to find
these are stored in a separate table
with a name of the method and the price
requirement 11 mentions these can be
selected and each method has a single
price
we have an order total field which is a
calculation of the product prices and
the shipping method
we calculate this so we know how much an
order came to as prices for products
could change in the future
finally we have an order status table
and a field to link to it
this would store the statuses that an
order can go through such as ordered
processing and delivered
this design assumes that a shopping cart
would be converted to a shop order which
could be done by the application
this means that the shopping cart table
is separate to the shop order
we could use an alternative design where
there was only one shop order table
which could represent the shopping cart
by having empty values for things like
order date and address which I think
could work as well
an order has many products and these
products are stored in a table called
order line
this table includes an ID a link to the
product item that was ordered and a link
to the order that the order line belongs
to
it also includes the quantity of the
product that was ordered and the price
of the product when ordered because
prices can change over time
this order and order line design is
quite common in e-commerce databases
the next feature we'll look at is
reviews
requirement 13 states that a user should
be able to leave a review for a product
they have purchased which includes a
rating from one to five and a text
comment
we've done this by adding a user review
table here
this includes an ID as the primary key a
link to the user who left the review and
a link to the product that was included
in an order
this is a link to the order line record
so we can allow reviews to be left for
products that a user has ordered
we have a rating value which is the
number from one to five and the comment
is the text comment to be added for the
review
the final requirement number 14 is the
ability for promotions or sales to be
run which allows for one or more product
categories to have a specific discount
on their price
we have achieved this by adding the
promotion table
this includes an ID a name of the
promotion and a description if one needs
to be added
we have a discount rate which is the
percentage of discount applied to
products such as 10 or 50 percent
we also have a start date and end date
which the website may want to display or
communicate to customers
a promotion can have many categories and
a category can have many promotions so
we need a joining table to handle this
many-to-many relationship
we've called this table promotion
category and it simply includes a link
to the category and the promotion
so that's how we can meet this
requirement for promotions and
categories
so we've covered all the requirements in
our database design
here's the full design again which you
can get an image of using the link in
the description
what's next if you want to create the
SQL for this to set up your own
eCommerce database check out my video
here which is about creating an SQL
database based on a database design
I don't have the SQL for this design
specifically but if I add it later it
will be in the description
if you want to learn more about database
design and SQL visit my website at
databasestar.com
if you like this video consider
subscribing to my channel
thanks for watching